Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the man who had
personified the Islamic Republic for
nearly four decades, is dead. Within
days, Iran's Assembly of Experts had
chosen his son, Mojtaba, as the
country's new supreme leader. The speed
of that decision says less about the
strength of Iran's institutions than it
does about who truly runs the country.
You see, in the Islamic Republic, formal
authority and real power are not the
same thing. While clerics hold titles
and names, they do not always decide how
leadership passes from one to the next.
Behind the religious establishment
stands the Revolutionary Guards, Iran's
most powerful institution, and in
moments like this, the ultimate
kingmaker. So, for all intents and
purposes, the IRGC has essentially
staged a coup and called it succession.
But while Mojtaba's election ends the
immediate succession crisis, it does not
bring stability. As the new supreme
leader, he inherits a country at war,
and there is no telling how long he can
hold power as bombs continue to fall
across its cities. And so, the real
question was never about who replaces
Khamenei, but whether Iran's political
system can survive the war long enough
for any succession to matter. History,
after all, does not wait for orderly
transitions.
Meanwhile, Iraqi Kurdish fighters appear
to be weighing cross-border operations
into Iran. Over 100 sources have covered
this story, but sorting through that
amount of coverage has been a nightmare.
Because depending on which outlet I'm
looking at, I get a completely different
version of events. This is exactly why I
use Ground News, today's sponsor,
because they're the best tool to stay
objective in my reporting.
On this story, Ground News lets me
instantly see which headlines focus on
the Iraqi Kurdistan government or which
instead blame autonomous militias such
as PJAK. Same story, two different
realities. But, with Ground News, I cut
through that because they pull in
coverage from local and international
sources and put it in one easy-to-read
feed, letting me quickly see every angle
of the story and get to the truth. And
the color-coded layout makes it easy to
filter for high factuality sources, see
political bias, or filter for the
geographic origin of each source. On
developing stories like this, Ground
News provides clarity you don't find
anywhere else.
Because I believe in Ground News so
much, we're offering you 40% off the
same Vantage plan that I use for my
research. Just click the link in the
description or go to
ground.news/caspian.
It's one of the biggest discounts
they've ever offered.
Iran's supreme leader is both the head
of state and a religious figure believed
to be a representative of God by his
Shia followers. Khamenei held the office
for 37 years, during which time he
greatly expanded his power and scope
over the civilian government. However,
the Islamic Republic was never a one-man
show. As much as the supreme leader had
appropriated the levers of power,
[music] it was still a system.
So, even though the supreme leader had
the final say on all matters in the
country, he only arrived at decisions
after a lengthy consultative process.
Whatever one may think of the Islamic
Republic as a state, [music] it has
formal institutions, codified
procedures, contingency plans, and
mechanisms for continuity of government,
even if those institutions are sometimes
shaky.
That said, the system was never built to
withstand [music]
this level of stress. In the first 2
days of this war, numerous top officials
had already been taken out, including
the commander of the Revolutionary
Guards, the defense minister, the chief
of staff of the armed forces,
>> [music]
>> and the secretary of the defense
council. Iran's system for continuity of
government was never designed to absorb
this many losses at once.
As a result, various rivals and factions
are now pressing for wartime power amid
diminished popularity and uncertainty
among Iran's clerical establishment. And
even though Mojtaba's promotion ends the
official succession, the underlying
power struggle is far from over.
To cope with wartime stress, a
three-person council was formed recently
to hold power until the new supreme
leader is settled in. It includes the
moderate president, Masoud Pezeshkian,
the hardline head of the judiciary,
Gholam Hossein [music]
Mosheni Ejei, and a senior cleric,
Alireza Arafi. But with the
American-Israeli strikes ongoing, there
is no indication how long this council
will remain in place, or even if its
members will still be alive in a week
from now.
The truth is that every Iranian official
has a target on their back. Israel and
the United States have made clear they
intend to eliminate Iran's leadership
systematically, and Mojtaba would
naturally sit at the top of that list.
But in many ways, that misses the point.
This story is not really about Mojtaba
as a person. Individuals may come and go
in wartime. What matters [music] is not
the man in the chair, but the system
behind it and the power brokers who
decide who gets to sit there.
Iran has regulations and procedures, but
its political system is also complex,
intricate, and somewhat confusing. The
top factions compete fiercely,
particularly over succession and the
path the Islamic Republic should take in
both domestic and foreign affairs.
The Revolutionary Guards are without
doubt the dominant force, the
kingmakers, if you will. They wield
influence not only in military affairs,
but also across the economy with many of
Iran's financial elites being members of
the IRGC.
Mojtaba was the IRGC's top pick. He rose
to prominence after the death of Iran's
former president, Ebrahim Raisi, who was
long considered the next in line to
Khamenei, but died in a helicopter crash
in 2024.
Since then, the IRGC has sponsored
Mojtaba, and the fact that he has now
been chosen as the supreme leader
suggests the outcome was not driven by
procedure alone. For context, Mojtaba is
himself a former member of the IRGC with
combat experience in the Iran-Iraq War.
His public statements are not as
conservative as those of other clerics,
but he believes in enforcing government
verdicts through brute force, and that
uncompromising attitude is evident from
his past actions. Mojtaba played a key
role in pressuring the IRGC to crush the
2009 protests.
He's also no fan of America or Israel.
His father, mother, wife, son, sister,
and other relatives have all been killed
in recent air strikes. So, for Mojtaba,
this conflict is as personal as it gets.
Moreover, Mojtaba is a strong advocate
of the axis of resistance. He believes
Iran should leverage its proxies in
Lebanon, Yemen, and Iraq to expand
Iranian influence. So, by backing him,
the IRGC hopes to keep things running as
usual.
However, make no mistake, the
Revolutionary Guards are not a monolith.
They too have internal rivalries. Some
of these rivalries span different
generations, and others run along
ideological lines. Adding to the
intrigue, dozens of senior IRGC
commanders have been killed in Israeli
strikes over the past 2 years. [music]
So, while the IRGC is the dominant force
in Iran, its internal politics are in
near constant flux.
With Mojtaba now in office, the IRGC has
secured its candidate, but the real work
is just beginning. As the new
figurehead, Mojtaba is unlikely to be as
influential as his father was. He will
instead rely on the IRGC to keep things
together.
For now though, who occupies the supreme
office is not Tehran's most pressing
concern. Iran's objective right now is
simply to fight on. They don't need a
supreme leader to launch missiles. But,
if the Persian theocracy survives the
war, the new supreme leader will play a
critical role in holding the system
together, even if he plays second fiddle
to the IRGC.
Earlier this year, nationwide protests
erupted over economic grievances, and
quickly turned into calls for an end to
the theocracy. Iran's leadership
responded to the unrest with
overwhelming violence, killing thousands
of people in a matter of days. Not
surprisingly, celebrations broke out in
Tehran and other parts of the country
after news of Khamenei's death. That
said, amid the ongoing internet
blackout, it is simply impossible to
determine how widespread the
celebrations truly are.
This is a focal point because when Trump
first announced the attacks against
Iran, he issued a direct call to the
Iranian people. Bombs will be dropping
everywhere. When we are finished, take
over your government. It will be yours
to take.
Foreign-based members of Iran's
opposition are hoping Khamenei's death
will build momentum for protests and
demonstrations. Reza Pahlavi, the son of
Iran's deposed king and now the leading
opposition exile, has repeatedly called
on Iranians to rise up against the
government.
Under these conditions of external
pressure and internal unrest, Iran's
power brokers may have felt that they
couldn't leave the supreme office
vacant. Pushing Mojtaba forward may have
been a way to impose order quickly and
signal continuity.
In moments of existential danger,
succession stops being procedure and
becomes triage.
I've been your host Shirvan from Caspian
Report. If you enjoy these videos,
consider supporting the channel on
Patreon and click the bell icon so the
next one doesn't slip past you. Thank
you for your time and salaam.